---
layout: post
title: Release 20.09
---

## Ability to override worker description per batch

When starting a `gspc::scoped_runtime_system` one traditionally
specifies a `topology_description` for the workers, which is reused
for any `add_worker()` call. An overload has been added that allows
giving a specific description per call, in order to allow asymmetric
topologies.

## RIF strategy 'local'

Developers testing on machines that support neither `ssh` nor `pbsdsh`
may now at least validate their application on the `local` node by
specifying `--rif-strategy=local`. The strategy expects the only node
given to be `hostname()`.

## Modify worker environment variables

It is now possible to specify the environment variables to be set when
starting a runtime system's workers, rather than having a predefined,
empty, environment.

By default the environment still is completely empty, and no variables
other than the ones referenced in the options will be set in the
remote process. The following options have been added:

- `--worker-env-set-variable` to explicitly set the value of a
  variable on the command line
- `--worker-env-copy-file path` to set all variables in the given
  files, where every line is a key-value pair in `env` style (`key=value`)
- `--worker-env-copy-variable name` and `--worker-env-copy-current` to
  copy variables set in the process starting up by allow-list or
  blanket copy respectively

## Ability to disable function-does-not-unload check

It is now possible to disable the check for a module call function not
leaking any dynamic libraries (and thus tainting the worker
process). Workflow developers may tag their `module` with
`require_function_unloads_without_rest="false"` (default: `true`) to
mark the taint as known and okay.

## Orchestrator was inlined into Agent

The `orchestrator` process has been removed and the functionality was
moved into `agent`. This has also removed the `--orchestrator-port`
command line option.

Due to removing this level, log messages may slightly differ. Besides
that post-job cleanup scripts should be adopted to no longer try to
kill `orchestrator`.

- `$install/lib` and `$install/libexec/gspc` is no longer added to
  `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` of worker automatically. Users may use
  `--worker-env-set-variable` to reconstruct this behavior, but proper
  `rpath`s are suggested instead.
- The `stencil_cache` library was removed as it was too specific for
  generic use.

## Fixes

- When raising a `missing_binding` exception, the full path into a
  struct is given, instead of just the root.
- It is now possible to start `0` workers per node in a topology
  description, to free clients from having to filter the description
  in degenerated cases.
- Error messages have been improved when using the RIF `ssh` strategy
  but neither having `USER` or `HOME` exported or having an `id_rsa`
  file, nor specifying the respective option on the command line.
- All RIF strategies now support `--help`, if they support command
  line arguments.
- Improved the performance of parallel applications that are
  generating large numbers of independent tasks, but have way fewer
  workers than tasks.
- `pnetc` no longer throws an exception when synthesizing virtual
  places with tokens on them.
- The virtual memory client no longer fails to transfer when a large
  amount of ranges is given.
- The expression language parser now correctly handles `integral 'f'`
  for floats.
- Properly clean up processes when using rif strategy `pbsdsh`

## Meta

- Support for GCC 9 and 10 has been added.
- (Source-build only) Added support for Qt5 versions 5.10 and up,
  tested with 5.9.7 and 5.14.2.
