---
layout: post
title: Release 21.06
---

## Optional Components

GPI-Space now supports disabling some components at configuration time
to reduce the dependencies needed as well as build time. The following
options can be given to CMake with either `=OFF` or `=ON` appended:

- `-DGSPC_WITH_MONITOR_APP`: The `gspc-monitor` (also known as
  "gantt") application for execution monitoring. This component
  requires Qt5.

## 'eureka-group' is now available as a tag that contains an expression

The attribute `eureka-group` of the XML tag `<module>` can only store
constant strings. To allow for data dependent eureka groups, the
element `<eureka-group>` has been introduced as an alternative.

The content of the new tag `<eureka-group>` is interpreted as an
expression and evaluated with the evaluation context of the
transition, e.g. with all the input tokens are known. The expression
shall return a value of type `string`.

Please choose between the attribute or the tag, it is an error to
specify both.

In general prefer the tag over the attribute as the tag is more
flexible. Current application code

```
<module ... eureka-group="value" ...>
</module>
```

can now be written as

```
<module ... ...>
  <eureka-group>"value"</eureka-group>
</module>
```

Note that the meaning of the double quotes '"' has changed in the
example: In the former `eureka-group="value"` they enclose the
attribute value, which is a string. Now, in
`<eureka-group>"value"</eureka-group>` the double quotes are
interpreted by the expression parser to parse the (same) string.

The possibility to let the eureka group depend on the inputs of a
transition is demonstrated by the example code:

```
<defun>
  <in name="eureka_group" type="string"/>
  <module>
    <eureka-group>${eureka_group}</eureka-group>
  </module>
</defun>
```

It determines the eureka group by the value of an input port.

String concatenation can be used to combine information into a more
complex eureka group:

```
<defun>
  <in name="eureka_group" type="string"/>
  <in name="eureka_id" type="string"/>
  <module>
    <eureka-group>${eureka_group} + "_" + ${eureka_id}</eureka-group>
  </module>
</defun>
```

## Installed libraries now hide unintended symbols

To avoid implementation details leaking into user code, GPI-Space's
libraries now no longer export all symbols but instead explicitly
export the intended API. Only symbols marked `GSPC_DLLEXPORT` in the
headers are part of the API and other symbols may vanish or change
without notice.

This implies that applications **might** break due to relying on
symbols that weren't intended to be used. This might also be the case
when using intended API but linking the wrong library. It might also
happen that due to GPI-Space's dependencies linking a previously
missing third-party dependency is now missing.

If an application fails to link with undefined symbols after updating
to this version, check whether these symbols came from GPI-Space
before. If that's the case, check

- whether the correct library is linked
- whether all third-party dependencies are linked and not relied upon
  GPI-Space to be provided
- whether the symbol used is actually part of the public GPI-Space API

The first two cases can be resolved by changing the libraries linked
to include the correct dependencies. In the latter case, a sibling
function might be part of the API and should be used instead. If there
is no such sibling function, contact GPI-Space support to discuss
whether it should be added to the API.

## [API CHANGE] gspc::worker_description hides its implementation

The structure `gspc::worker_description` now hides its implementation
in order to allow for future changes.

Applications that access the internal information must now store it by
themselves.

Also applications can not copy `gspc::worker_descriptions` any longer
but only `move` them. To adapt to this a current application code of
the form

```
gspc::worker_description const description {args...};

drts.add_worker ({description}, ...);
```

must now be written as

```
std::vector<gspc::worker_description> descriptions;
descriptions.emplace_back {args...};
drts.add_worker (descriptions, ...);
```

## CMake Utility Restructuring

GPISpace's CMake utilities underwent some restructuring as a step
towards modernizing the build infrastructure and the ongoing
modularization of GPISpace. It is now organized as a standalone
project (`util-cmake`) including install targets and a find package
config file. In addition, the directory structure of the scripts was
modified to prepend a namespace directory to better reflect the origin
of the scripts.

- `util-cmake` enforces the usage of a compatible cmake minimum
  version (currently 3.13). Parent projects will throw a fatal error
  if they don't set an appropriate CMake version with
  `cmake_minimum_required` before adding `util-cmake`.
- All CMake utility scripts need to have the namespace `util-cmake/`
  prepended to them (e.g. `include (add_macros)` => `include
  (util-cmake/add_macros)`)
- The `add_unit_test` function is no longer part of
  `add_macros.cmake`, but resides now in script of its own
  `add_unit_test.cmake`.
- The `bundle.sh` script should no longer be accessed using a
  hard-coded path.  Instead, util-cmake exposes a variable called
  `util_cmake_bundle_sh` populated with the correct absolute path.
- `util-cmake` can now be installed if required. By default, the
  installation is deactivated.

## GPISpace CMake Minimum Version Enforcement

Same as `util-cmake`, GPISpace's package config file now enforces the
usage of a required minimum CMake version (currently 3.13).
Applications failing to use at least that version will fail with a
fatal error during configuration time.

## Fixes

- Removed methods marked `INDICATES_A_RACE` from production code.
- Respect `TESTING_RIF_STRATEGY` and `TESTING_RIF_STRATEGY_PARAMETERS`
  in all tests.
- Fixed bug related to the thread-safe creation of SSL contexts.
- Improved documentation: added documentation for the Eureka feature
  and for creating topology descriptions.

## Miscellaneous

- Applications that link `pnetc` generated libraries can now link
  `GPISpace::APIGuard` instead of defining `WE_GUARD_SYMBOL`
  themselves.
- Removed the attribute `children_allowed` from workers. The agent can
  have only terminal components as workers now.
- Made the worker manager a component that belongs only to the
  scheduler, forbidding the direct interaction between agent and
  worker manager. The agent is now just talking to the scheduler,
  which is the only one who may access the worker manager, in a
  thread-safe way.
- Moved functionality proper to scheduling from the worker manager to
  the scheduler side.

