---
layout: post
title: Release 21.03
---

## Virtual Memory is now called IML and separate

The virtual memory layer of GPI-Space has been factored out to become
a separate component, the "Independent Memory Layer", short IML. It is
still shipped with GPI-Space and the APIs are backwards compatible.

GPI-Space has learned to use an externally started IML rather than
bootstrapping its own. This allows applications to keep an IML alive
across runs to cache data, or to allow preparing and extracting data
independent of GPI-Space. The socket of an external IML can be
specified with the `--remote-iml-vmem-socket` option, which needs to
point to the IML server on all hosts used by the runtime system.

The independent API is available in `include/iml/`. It can be used
independently from GPI-Space by using `find_package (IML)`.

## CMake "config" file now provided

GPI-Space now provides a CMake package config file to replace
`FindGPISpace.cmake` scripts. `find_package (GPISpace)` will now find
GPI-Space by searching `GPISpace_ROOT` and `GPISpace_DIR` or
`CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH` (see documentation of [CMake's `find_package`](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.13/command/find_package.html#search-procedure)
for details).

Applications using `beautify_find_gpispace.cmake` will need to update
that script and remove their copy of `FindGPISpace.cmake`. The script
was updated to be backwards compatible with the existing arguments.

Applications using `find_package (GPISpace)` need to change how the
version requirement is specified as the standard CMake syntax is now
used:

```
# old
find_package (GPISpace REQUIRED COMPONENTS VERSION=20.12)
# new
find_package (GPISpace 21.03 EXACT REQUIRED)
```

The argument `REVISION` has been removed. Its usage will cause an
error instead. `beautify_find_gpispace` handling of `VERSION` has been
fixed.

The old `FindGPISpace.cmake` script is no longer supported and was
removed from the repository.

## Expression plugins: Nest exceptions, print context

When a plugin callback throws an exception, then the exception is
wrapped by an runtime_error that adds the evaluation context to the
error message.

That frees clients from adding the context and helps developers to
debug plugins.

## Fixes

- Information about dependencies found are no longer hidden when
  configuring.
- The XSD and RNC schemas now specify the attribute
  `allow-empty-ranges` at the correct location.
- `pnetc` now honors `<memory-buffer read_only="false">`, rather than
  treating presence of the attribute as `true`.
- Petri-net modules no longer link against `drts-context` if
  `pass_context="false"`.
- Fix error handling in client when receiving data in case of
  disconnection.
- Fixed races between event handlers and layer callbacks in agent that
  might cause `Error: reason := receiving response failed:
  asio. misc:2 code := 2` in rare cases.

### Allow multiple specializations of templates with module calls

It is now possible to use multiple specializations of templates that
contain module calls. In order to get unique wrappers, the type map is
mangled into the function name, e.g. if a template with the type
parameter `T` is specialized by `int` the function name is extended by
`_T_int`.

### Respect the `BUILD_TESTING` option

Allow the users to enable/disable building the tests by forcing the system to
properly handle the CMake `BUILD_TESTING` option.

## Miscellaneous

- Various improvements have been made to the README document to ease
  installation process of dependencies and GPI-Space and testing a
  fresh installation.
- The upper Boost version requirement of 1.63.0 is now enforced when
  configuring.
- The XSD and RNC schemas now document defaults.

