---
layout: post
title: Release 24.12
---

## List of supported OS:

- oraclelinux8 (gcc)
- oraclelinux9 (gcc, clang)
- rockylinux8 (gcc)
- rockylinux9 (gcc, clang)
- ubuntu2004 (gcc, clang)
- ubuntu2204 (gcc, clang)
- ubuntu2404 (gcc, clang)

Note that Ubuntu18.04 has reached the end of its life and the support
has been dropped.

## Support for "Number of tokens on a place":

The GPI-Space Petri-nets provide the "number of tokens" extension:
Petri-Nets are able to observe the number of tokens that are currently
placed on a place.

The connection type `connect-number-of-tokens` can be used to bind the
number of tokens on a place to a port of type `unsigned long`. Please see `share/doc/number_of_tokens_on_a_place.md` for more details.

## API CHANGEs and deprecations:

- GPI-Space has enabled c++17 across the code base and also in the
  public interfaces. This implies that the minimum required GCC
  compiler version has increased to 8.5.

- The Petri net compiler `pnetc` now includes `--std=c++17` in the
  flags used to compile the generated wrapper code. It used to be
  `--std=c++14` before.

- Use of some Boost classes has been deprecated (variant, optional,
  filesystem::path) and their STL counterparts are used instead. This
  is part of a bigger effort that has the goal to finally get rid of
  the dependency to the Boost library.

  Applications can still use the Boost interfaces. At some places
  existing codes might not be 100% compatible. One example is the use
  of the program options validation classes: Explicit casts to either
  `boost::filesystem::path` of `std::filesystem::path` might be required
  and code that looked like

  ```
     auto const path
       {vm.at (option::hostfile).as (po::nonempty_file)()};
  ```

  now becomes

  ```
     auto const path
       { static_cast<std::filesystem::path>
           (vm.at (option::hostfile).as (po::nonempty_file)())
       };
  ```

- `util-generic/nest_exceptions` has been deprecated: Please unroll
  the corresponding codes: What was

  ```
      util::nest_exception<Ex>
        ( fun
        , ctor_args
        );
  ```

  now becomes

  ```
      try
      {
        fun();
      }
      catch (...)
      {
        std::throw_with_nested (Ex {ctos_args});
      }
  ```

  To write it that way make it more explicit what happens and avoid
  issues with opening a new scope within fun.

## Misc: Use Spack for Eureka SelfTest

- The README instructions were updated to use a Spack installation of
  GPI-Space.

- `libssh2@1.11.0` and beyond broke their build API by changing how
  their library targets work.  This MR introduces a compatibility
  layer to ensure smooth working with older and newer versions of
  `libssh2`.d

- The support for colored cmake strings has been removed.

